The victory came a bit late. As Irfan Pathan clobbered Zaheer Khan for a thundering four at the start of the 20th over to the long-on fence, there was jubilation all round the Kings XI Punjab camp. Electing to bat first, Kings XI restricted Mumbai Indians to 154 for 9 in the 20 overs. The hosts chased the modest target without any major hiccups, finishing at 158 for 4 in 19.2 overs to register their third win in the tournament.

The victory is inconsequential as Kings XI are already out of the race for the semifinals, while Mumbai retain their position at the top of the table despite the defeat. Except for their luck with the toss, the day belonged to Kings XI. They bowled with purpose. Irfan Pathan and Piyush Chawla were particularly impressive, claiming three wickets each, while rookie seamer Luv Ablish took two. Man of the Match Kumar Sangakkara led from the front. Their batting came good, resulting in a facile win.

Chasing the 155-run target, Kings XI were never in any sort of trouble. New recruit Adrian Barath never looked out of depth. In the company of Mahela Jayawardene, the diminutive batsman batted with confidence. He showed good defence and never hesitated to attack either. He backed his instincts and was involved in 41-run first-wicket stand with Jayawardene in 4.3 overs before Jayawardene departed.

Two successive fours he hit off Zaheer, which went racing to the long-off and long-off fence, proved that he was not afraid of the reputation of the bowler.

Sangakkara played a measured knock. It was the skipper who anchored the innings in a brilliant fashion. Though they lost the wickets of Barath (33, 27 balls, 4X4, 1X6) and Yuvraj at the other end, the left-handed batsman kept his cool.

As the Kings XI approached the target, he played some glorious strokes. By the time he departed after contributing 42-ball 56, the side was on the threshhold of victory. Irfan Pathan and Reetinder Sodhi completed the formalities. For Mumbai, Zaheer Khan had an off day, while Harbhajan, playing on his home ground, failed to make any impression. Lasith Malinga emerged the best bowler, claiming the key scalps of Jayawardene and Sangakkara.

Earlier, Irfan Pathan provided his an ideal start to Kings XI, when Shikhar Dhawan played on an away-swinging delivery. Ambati Rayudu played some bold strokes. He was harsh to Brett Lee as well as Pathan as runs came on a fast clip. With 50 on the board, Rayudu going great guns with skipper Sachin Tendulkar, Mumbai looked on course to a competitive total.

But leg-spinner Piyush Chawla, introduced from the pavilion end, made an instant impact. He struck thrice to turn the match on the head. First he castled Rayudu. Next, he had Saurabh Tiwari caught behind. When immediately thereafter he rattled the timber of a well-set Sachin Tendulkar and the side reduced to 70 for 4, Mumbai were in trouble. Then Pathan compounded their woes, evicting Satish and Pollard. It was left to Duminy to wage a battle. He scored 35, the highest score from the side, while R Satish contributed 20 as Mumbai Indians put 154 on the board
